Casper appears to be converging slowly towards DPoS, because of a fundamental problem with human nature: somewhere, someone has to trust a key party to make a self-interested choice, and to force (through incentives and disincentives) this choice to be in the interest of the chain.

With PoW, the self interested choice is whether to use spare computing power and/or memory to participate in securing the chain, or to attempt to crack the passwords securing the chain, or to go work on some other chain. Or something else. This set of choices is extrinsic to the chain and creates a natural economic linkage between external actors, who may or may not be hostile to the chain, and internal actors (who also may or may not be hostile).

With PoS, the choices are entirely intrinsic to the chain. Furthermore, it is possible to reap external rewards by virtue of internal bad behavior. This creates perverse incentives for the Stakers who are securing the chain to act against the chain.

DPoS aims to fix this by selecting the actors in advance with characteristics that are known to be supportive of the community choice. These "delegates" must be trusted. Trust cannot be widely or easily bestowed, so this naturally leads to centralization, which leads to a set of problems where a minority can dictate the fate of a majority, with impunity.

Casper aims to fix this by virtue of slasher, which punishes stakers who behave badly. Casper has the advantage of creating disincentives for bad actions on the basis that bad actors suffer the consequences. However, this punishment depends on the person directing the validation being the person who benefits from the stake. If these two persons are ever not the same, then the punishment for bad deeds is not visited on the doer of the deeds, but on some other parties. In order for Casper to fix this problem, it must either avoid the notion of Staking Pools, or admit that staking pools are in fact delegates and deal with this undesirable conclusion. Since Casper has now determined that it is economically unprofitable for small accounts to stake, and to communicate between stakers fast enough to guarantee fast block times, only a small number of validators can be permitted. Vitalik's latest paper on Casper Economics is clear about this. Staking pools are inevitable.
